Cloth diapers section (#32)
iteles/blw-baby: cloth-diapers/wash-routine.md

# Wash routine

> The wash routine for cloth diapers is the **main source** of _every_ cloth diaper issue from smells to rashes to leaks.

> The cloth diaper groups online are ***filled*** with people bemoaning issues with their cloth diapers that turn into nothing but 'let's trouble shoot your wash routine' posts.

Reviewer: The sentiment of this sentence comes across as 🤦‍♀️ when it could be written in a less 🙄 style ...
e.g:
```suggestion

Cloth diaper forums/groups online are ***filled*** with people bemoaning issues with their cloth diapers. Most of the time the issue is their wash routine e.g. machine cycle, temperature, detergent, drying, etc. This is all easy to fix once you understand the process.
```

> ***The problem is simple: there is a HUGE amount of misinformation out

Reviewer: The formatting of this intro could be re-worked/worded ...
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/194400/173181110-28f78bff-5b50-442a-bc31-87baeff411a6.png)

there on what a wash routine should be***.

> And yet, the basis of a good wash routine is _extremely_ simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good wash routine is _extremely_ simple.
```

> ## A Cloth Diaper Wash Routine - Start Here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Cloth Diaper Wash Routine: Start Here
```

> Wash your diapers at the end of every 2-3 days.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wash your diapers at the end of every 2-3 days. 
Depending on the size of your machine, 
and ability to store the dirty diapers you may need to increase wash frequency. 
We are lucky enough to have a high-capacity (**12kg** / **26 pound**) machine 
that fits 3 days worth of diapers easily. 
If you have a "compact" machine (e.g. **4kg** / **8 pound** capacity) 
consider washing more frequently as putting too much 
in the machine at once will dramatically reduce the effectiveness of the wash cycle. 
Aim to only fill the tub of the machine to 1/3 of its' capacity to allow the diapers plenty of space to tumble. 
Over-filling the machine will lead to incomplete washes.
```

### 1. Cold rinse, no detergent ('prewash')
Two important things to know here:
+ The key reason we're doing this step is to **rinse as much of the
human waste** out of those diapers as possible before actually washing them
  + We ***don't use detergent*** because we're not trying to clean them yet;
  the detergent is in the main wash and dosed appropriately for a
  heavily soiled load. If we start using detergent in prewashes we
  run the risk of ***detergent build-up*** (another common cloth diaper
    horror story)
+ I do this as a **completely separate wash** rather than just hitting the
'prewash'button on my machine. This is for two reasons:
  1. Many modern machines 'efficiently' don't drain the _full_ amount  of the
  prewash water out of the machine before starting the main wash. this is the

>   _opposite_ of what we need - we want **all of that :poop: water drained**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  _opposite_ of what we need - we want **all of that 💩 water drained**
```

>   _before_ out main wash starts with clean water

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  _before_ our main wash starts with clean water
```

  2. Using a separate wash often uses a bit more water and is a little longer
  than a 'prewash' which is what we want.

### 2. Hot main wash, full detergent, extra rinses
This is your main wash. It is a LONG cycle (often more than 3, even 4 hours)

> but remember, you're cleaning full on human waster out of cloth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but remember, the machine is cleaning human waster out of cloth.
```
"full on" doesn't add much to this phrase. 💭

> **You want to have as much water as possible** in this wash so look up your

Reviewer: perhaps a disclaimer on the environmental sustainability of using "as much water as possible" ... 🤷‍♂️

Reviewer: covered below ... kinda.

machine's instructions and figure out which program this is for you - often
it is the cotton program.
Yes, I understand this isn't as eco-friendly as the alternative but trust me

> when I say a few more litres of water twice a week is much better than giving

Reviewer: it would be _far_ better if you actually _quantified_ all the numbers to make it clearer for everyone.
i.e. calculate the _total_ environmental cost of cloth diapers and compare them to the plastic land-fill ones.

Author: I am not in a position to do all these calculations unless we're writing a public-facing blog and we're getting some return from it.

It's a complex set of calculations that include MANY factors and hard to find manufacturing information. DEFRA has currently been working on updating their 2008 report for over 6 months 🤷‍♀️ 

This would be super cool but sadly not a high priority right _now_.

up on cloth diapers altogether because your diapers aren't getting clean and
become a nightmare.

Key points:
+ Dose your detergent appropriately (see below)
+ Use the '**heavily soiled'** option on your machine
+ Add at least 2 **extra rinses** to your wash, more if you have them
+ Make sure your machine is **3 quarters full** so that you get the friction you need
to properly clean those diapers
  + If you don't have enough diapers in your load, bulk it out with clothing or
  small (hand) towels - *never use linens or large towels* because your diapers
  can get wrapped up in them and won't wash properly
+ Wash your diapers at the temperature indicated by manufacturers, this is
usually 40 degrees Celsius
  + Once a month we wash at 60 degrees C for maintenance

#### Dosing your detergent appropriately

> 1. Powder detergent rinses off your diapers more easily than liquid detergent

Reviewer: what is the science on this? surely a _liquid_ that is already dissolved would be easier to rinse? 💭 
not saying you are "wrong", just that you need to make it clear that either you have done the _science_ (experiments) or that this is the "consensus" on the forums.

so ideally, **use powder**.
2. Use 'real' detergent, not baby detergent or for sensitive skin as these do not

> wash as efficiently.

Reviewer: according to who? 🤷‍♂️ 
surely the fact that P&G have invested _hundreds of millions_ into researching and developing "baby detergents" there must be _some_ reasoning ...
perhaps help clarify that "baby detergents" are for keeping _outer_ clothes soft but don't work anywhere near as well on diapers that need more in-depth cleaning. 💭

Author: I'll clarify. They're fine for dirt, not for human waste 💩

3. Your detergent **must not have more than 5% soap content**
4. Use the dose of detergent recommended for the total kilos of your machine,
not the estimated amount of kilos in your diaper load (which remember, should
  be 3 quarters of your machine anyway)
5. Use the dose of detergent recommended for **heavily soiled** clothing (which
  is an additional amount over the amount recommended for your machine size)
6. Add the powder directly to the drum to get the most out of it and

> prevent gumming up your machine's tubes.

Reviewer: You could easily put together a table of machine/tub size, load, "soiling" level and detergent quantity. 💭

Author: The only reason this isn't possible is because the quantities are different for every powder detergent I have used to date 🤦‍♀️

program. We use the same program for the final rinse as we do for the prewash,
we just make sure we change the temperature.

**Your diapers shouldn't smell of anything** (not even laundry detergent,
  except sometimes a little faintly) when you get to the end of this routine!

## OUR Wash Routine

We tend to wash at the end of every 3rd day, or at the end of every 2nd in the
hot Summer to prevent smells.
If we're washing more often (end of every second day) I always make sure I have
small towels on hand to bulk out the load so it's 3 quarters full.

These are the programs and steps for our LG washing machine, in a _soft_ water area.

### 1. Cold rinse, no detergent

Machine steps:
+ Algodão (cotton)
+ Turbowash (quickwash version of the program selected above)
+ Bring temperature down to Zero

### 2. Hot main wash, full detergent, extra rinses

// Detergent quantities go here.

Machine steps:
+ Algodão (cotton)
+ Soil level: heavy (max)
+ 40 degrees (60 once a month as needed)
+ Extra rinse x 2

### 1. Hot rinse, no detergent

Machine steps:
+ Algodão (cotton)
+ Turbowash (quickwash version of the program selected above)

<!-- They depend on:

> + The hardness of your water

Reviewer: this commented-out section is worth including. guessing it's work-in-progress. 💭

Author: I just thought it was a bit too overwhelming for people, i.e. too many things can 'go wrong'.
